.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: ROFF man page for ncap2
.\" Usage:
.\" nroff -man ~/nco/man/ncap2.1 | less
.TH NCAP2 1
.SH NAME
ncap2 \- netCDF Arithmetic Processor, Next Generation
.SH SYNTAX
ncap2 [\-3] [\-4] [\-5] [\-6] [\-7] [\-A] [\-\-bfr
.IR sz_byt ] [\-C] [\-c] [\-D 
.IR dbg_lvl ]
[\-d 
.IR dim ,[
.IR min ][,[
.IR max ]]]
[-F] [--fl_fmt=fmt] [\-f]
[\-\-glb
.IR att_name=
.IR att_val ]]
[\-h] [\-\-hdf] [\-\-hdr_pad
.IR sz_byt ] [\-\-hpss_try]
[\-l 
.IR path ]
[\-\-no_tmp_fl] [\-O] [\-o 
.IR output-file ]
[\-p 
.IR path ]
[\-R] [\-r] [\-\-ram_all] [\-S 
.IR script-file ] [\-s 
.IR script ] [\-t
.IR thr_nbr ] [\-\-uio] [\-v 
.IR var [,...]]
.I [ input-file ] 
.I output-file 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B ncap2
supersedes and is backwards-compatible with 
.B ncap
which is now deprecated.
Both operators arithmetically process netCDF files.
The primary 
.B ncap2 
documentation is currently the sample script
<http://nco.sf.net/ncap2.in> 
The remainder of this manpage is identical to the 
.B ncap
manpage.

The processing instructions are contained either in the 
.B NCO
script file 
.B fl.nco
or in a sequence of command line arguments.
The options 
.B \-s
(or long options 
.B \-\-spt
or 
.B \-\-script)
are used for in-line scripts and 
.B \-S
(or long options 
.B \-\-fl_spt
or 
.B \-\-script-file)
are used to provide the filename where (usually multiple) scripting
commands are pre-stored.    
.B ncap2
was written to perform arbitrary albebraic
transformations of data and archive the results as easily as possible.
Missing values are treated correctly.
The results of the algebraic manipulations are called 
.I derived fields. 

Unlike the other operators, 
.B ncap2
does not accept a list of
variables to be operated on as an argument to 
.B \-v.
Rather, the 
.B \-v 
switch takes no arguments and indicates that 
.B ncap2
should output 
.I only
user-defined variables. 
.B ncap2
does not accept or understand the 
.B \-x 
switch.
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Compute the square of variable 
.BR T
.RS
ncap2 \-s "T2=T*T" in.nc out.nc
.RE

.\" NB: Append man_end.txt here
.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: Trailer file for common ending to NCO man pages
.\" Usage: 
.\" Append this file to end of NCO man pages immediately after marker
.\" that says "Append man_end.txt here"
.SH AUTHOR
.B NCO
manual pages written by Charlie Zender and originally formatted by Brian Mays.

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <http://sf.net/bugs/?group_id=3331>.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1995-2018 Charlie Zender
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B NCO
is maintained as a Texinfo manual called the 
.B NCO Users Guide.
Because 
.B NCO
is mathematical in nature, the documentation includes TeX-intensive
portions not viewable on character-based displays. 
Hence the only complete and authoritative versions of the 
.B NCO Users Guide 
are the PDF (recommended), DVI, and Postscript versions at
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.pdf>, <http://nco.sf.net/nco.dvi>,
and <http://nco.sf.net/nco.ps>, respectively.
HTML and XML versions
are available at <http://nco.sf.net/nco.html> and
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.xml>, respectively.

If the
.B info
and
.B NCO
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info nco
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual, except for the
TeX-intensive portions.

.BR ncap (1), 
.BR ncap2 (1), 
.BR ncatted (1), 
.BR ncbo (1), 
.BR ncclimo (1), 
.BR nces (1), 
.BR ncecat (1), 
.BR ncflint (1), 
.BR ncks (1), 
.BR nco (1), 
.BR ncpdq (1), 
.BR ncra (1), 
.BR ncrcat (1), 
.BR ncremap (1), 
.BR ncrename (1), 
.BR ncwa (1) 

.SH HOMEPAGE
The 
.B NCO
homepage at <http://nco.sf.net> contains more information.
