.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: ROFF man page for ncatted
.\" Usage:
.\" nroff -man ~/nco/man/ncatted.1 | less
.TH NCATTED 1
.SH NAME
ncatted \- netCDF Attribute Editor
.SH SYNTAX
ncatted [\-a 
.IR att_dsc ]
[\-a ...] [\-\-bfr
.IR sz_byt ] [\-D
.IR dbg_lvl]
[\-\-glb
.IR att_name=
.IR att_val ]]
[\-h] [\-\-hdr_pad
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-l path] [\-O] [\-p path] [\-R] [\-r] [\-\-ram_all] [\-t] [\-\-uio]
.I input-file
[
.IR output-file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B ncatted
edits attributes in a netCDF file.  
If you are editing attributes then you are spending too much time in the
world of metadata, and 
.B ncatted
was written to get you back out as
quickly and painlessly as possible.
.B ncatted
can 
.IR append ,
.IR create ,
.IR delete ,
.IR modify ,
.IR nappend ,
and 
.I overwrite
attributes (all explained below).  
Furthermore, 
.B ncatted
allows each editing operation to be applied
to every variable in a file, thus saving you time when you want to
change attribute conventions throughout a file.
.B ncatted
interprets character attributes as strings.
.PP
Because repeated use of 
.B ncatted
can considerably increase the size
of the 
.B history
global attribute, the
.B -h
switch is provided to override automatically appending the
command to the 
.B history
global attribute in the 
.IR output-file .
.PP
When 
.B ncatted
is used to change the 
.B _FillValue
attribute,
it changes the associated missing data self-consistently.
If the internal floating point representation of a missing value, 
e.g., 1.0e36, differs between two machines then netCDF files produced 
on those machines will have incompatible missing values.
This allows 
.B ncatted
to change the missing values in files from 
different machines to a single value so that the files may then be 
concatenated together, e.g., by 
.BR ncrcat ,
without losing any
information.   
.PP
The key to mastering 
.B ncatted
is understanding the meaning of the
structure describing the attribute modification, 
.IR att_dsc .
Each 
.I att_dsc
contains five elements, which makes using
.B ncatted
somewhat complicated, but powerful.
The 
.I att_dsc
argument structure contains five arguments in the
following order: 
.PP
.I att_dsc
= 
.IR att_nm ,
.IR var_nm ,
.IR mode ,
.IR att_type ,
.IR att_val 
.PP
.TP
.B att_nm
Attribute name. 
Example: 
.B units
.TP
.B var_nm
Variable name. 
Example: 
.B pressure
.TP
.B mode
Edit mode abbreviation. 
Example: 
.BR a .
See below for complete listing of valid values of 
.IR mode .
.TP
.B att_type
Attribute type abbreviation. Example: 
.BR c .
See below for complete listing of valid values of 
.IR att_type .
.TP
.B att_val
Attribute value. Example: 
.BR pascal .
There should be no empty space between these five consecutive
arguments. 
The description of these arguments follows in their order of
appearance. 
.PP
The value of 
.I att_nm
is the name of the attribute you want to edit.
This meaning of this should be clear to all users of the 
.B ncatted
operator. 
.PP
The value of 
.I var_nm
is the name of the variable containing the
attribute (named 
.IR att_nm )
that you want to edit.
There are two very important and useful exceptions to this rule.
The value of 
.I var_nm
can also be used to direct 
.B ncatted
to
edit global attributes, or to repeat the editing operation for every
variable in a file.
A value of 
.I var_nm
of global\(rq indicates that 
.I att_nm
refers
to a global attribute, rather than a particular variable's attribute.
This is the method 
.B ncatted
supports for editing global
attributes.
If 
.I var_nm
is left blank, on the other hand, then 
.B ncatted
attempts to perform the editing operation on every variable in the file.
This option may be convenient to use if you decide to change the
conventions you use for describing the data.
.PP
The value of 
.I mode
is a single character abbreviation (
.BR a ,
.BR c ,
.BR d ,
.BR m ,
or 
.BR o )
standing for one of
five editing modes:
.TP
.B a 
.IR Append .
Append value 
.I att_val
to current 
.I var_nm
attribute
.I att_nm
value 
.IR att_val ,
if any.  
If 
.I var_nm
does not have an attribute 
.IR att_nm ,
it is created with value
.IR att_val.
.TP
.B c
.IR Create .
Create variable 
.I var_nm
attribute 
.I att_nm
with 
.I "att_val"
if 
.I att_nm
does not yet exist.  
If 
.I var_nm
already has an attribute 
.IR att_nm ,
there is no
effect. 
.TP
.B d
.IR Delete .
Delete current 
.I var_nm
attribute 
.IR att_nm .
If 
.I var_nm
does not have an attribute 
.IR att_nm ,
there is no
effect. 
When 
.I Delete
mode is selected, the 
.I att_type
and 
.I "att_val"
arguments are superfluous and may be left blank.
.TP
.B m
.IR Modify .
Change value of current 
.I var_nm
attribute 
.I att_nm
to value
.IR att_val .
If 
.I var_nm
does not have an attribute 
.IR att_nm ,
there is no
effect. 
.TP
.B n 
.IR Nappend .
Append value 
.I att_val
to current 
.I var_nm
attribute
.I att_nm
value 
.IR att_val ,
if any.  
If 
.I var_nm
does not have an attribute 
.IR att_nm ,
there is no
effect. 
.TP
.B o
.IR Overwrite .
Write attribute 
.I att_nm
with value 
.I att_val
to variable
.IR var_nm ,
overwriting existing attribute 
.IR att_nm ,
if any. 
This is the default mode.
.PP
The value of 
.I att_type
is a single character abbreviation (
.BR f ,
.BR d ,
.BR l ,
.BR s ,
.BR c ,
or 
.BR b )
standing for one of
the six primitive netCDF data types: 
.TP
.B f
.IR Float .
Value(s) specified in 
.I att_val
will be stored as netCDF intrinsic
type NC_FLOAT. 
.TP
.B d
.IR Double .
Value(s) specified in 
.I att_val
will be stored as netCDF intrinsic
type NC_DOUBLE.
.TP
.B l
.IR Long .
Value(s) specified in 
.I att_val
will be stored as netCDF intrinsic
type NC_LONG.
.TP
.B s
.IR Short .
Value(s) specified in 
.I att_val
will be stored as netCDF intrinsic
type NC_SHORT.
.TP
.B c
.I Char.
Value(s) specified in 
.I att_val
will be stored as netCDF intrinsic
type NC_CHAR.
.TP
.B b
.IR Byte .
Value(s) specified in 
.I att_val
will be stored as netCDF intrinsic
type NC_BYTE.
The specification of 
.I att_type
is optional in 
.I Delete
mode.
.PP
The value of 
.I att_val
is what you want to change attribute
.I att_nm
to contain.
The specification of 
.I att_val
is optional in 
.I Delete
mode.
Attribute values for all types besides NC_CHAR must have an attribute
length of at least one.
Thus 
.I att_val
may be a single value or one-dimensional array of
elements of type 
.BR att_type .
If the 
.I att_val
is not set or is set to empty space,
and the 
.I att_type
is NC_CHAR, e.g., 
.B "-a units,T,o,c,"""""
or 
.BR "-a units,T,o,c," ,
then the corresponding attribute is set to 
have zero length.
When specifying an array of values, it is safest to enclose
.I att_val
in double or single quotes, e.g., 
.B "-a levels,T,o,s,""1,2,3,4"""
or   
.BR "-a levels,T,o,s,'1,2,3,4'" .
The quotes are strictly unnecessary around 
.I att_val
except 
when 
.I att_val
contains characters which would confuse the calling
shell, such as spaces, commas, and wildcard characters. 
.PP
NCO processing of NC_CHAR attributes is a bit like Perl in that
it attempts to do what you want by default (but this sometimes causes 
unexpected results if you want unusual data storage).
If the 
.I att_type
is NC_CHAR then the argument is interpreted as a
string and it may contain C-language escape sequences,
which NCO will interpret before writing anything to disk.
NCO translates valid escape sequences and stores the
appropriate ASCII code instead.
Since two byte escape sequences
represent one byte
ASCII codes, e.g., ASCII 10 (decimal), the stored
string attribute is one byte shorter than the input string length for
each embedded escape sequence. 
These sequences in particular allow convenient editing of formatted text
attributes. 
See ncks netCDF Kitchen Sink, for more examples of string formatting
(with the 
.B ncks
.B -s
option) with special characters. 
.PP
Analogous to 
.BR printf ,
other special characters are also allowed by
.B ncatted
if they are "protected" by a backslash.
NCO simply strips away the leading backslash from these characters
before editing the attribute.
No other characters require protection by a backslash.
Backslashes which precede any other character
will not be filtered and will be included in the attribute.
.PP
Note that the NUL character 
which terminates C language
strings is assumed and need not be explicitly specified.
If 
NUL
is input, it will not be translated (because it would
terminate the string in an additional location).
Because of these context-sensitive rules, if wish to use an attribute of
type NC_CHAR to store data, rather than text strings, you should use
.B ncatted
with care.
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Append the string "Data version 2.0.\\n" to the global attribute
.BR history :
.RS
ncatted \-O \-a history,global,a,c,"Data version 2.0\\n" in.nc 
.RE
Note the use of embedded C language 
.BR printf() \-style
escape
sequences. 
.PP
Change the value of the 
.B long_name
attribute for variable 
.B T
from whatever it currently is to "temperature":
.RS
ncatted \-O \-a long_name,T,o,c,temperature in.nc
.RE
.PP
Delete all existing 
.B units
attributes:
.RS
ncatted \-O \-a units,,d,, in.nc
.RE
The value of 
.I var_nm
was left blank in order to select all
variables in the file.
The values of 
.I att_type
and 
.I att_val
were left blank because
they are superfluous in 
.I Delete
mode. 
.PP
Modify all existing 
.B units
attributes to "meter second-1"
.RS
ncatted \-O \-a units,,m,c,"meter second-1" in.nc
.RE
.PP
Overwrite the 
.B quanta
attribute of variable
.B energy
to an array of four integers. 
.RS
ncatted \-O \-a quanta,energy,o,s,"010,101,111,121" in.nc
.RE
.PP
See the manual for more complex examples, including how to input
C-language escape sequences and other special characters like
backslashes and question marks. 

.\" NB: Append man_end.txt here
.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: Trailer file for common ending to NCO man pages
.\" Usage: 
.\" Append this file to end of NCO man pages immediately after marker
.\" that says "Append man_end.txt here"
.SH AUTHOR
.B NCO
manual pages written by Charlie Zender and originally formatted by Brian Mays.

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <http://sf.net/bugs/?group_id=3331>.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1995-2018 Charlie Zender
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B NCO
is maintained as a Texinfo manual called the 
.B NCO Users Guide.
Because 
.B NCO
is mathematical in nature, the documentation includes TeX-intensive
portions not viewable on character-based displays. 
Hence the only complete and authoritative versions of the 
.B NCO Users Guide 
are the PDF (recommended), DVI, and Postscript versions at
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.pdf>, <http://nco.sf.net/nco.dvi>,
and <http://nco.sf.net/nco.ps>, respectively.
HTML and XML versions
are available at <http://nco.sf.net/nco.html> and
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.xml>, respectively.

If the
.B info
and
.B NCO
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info nco
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual, except for the
TeX-intensive portions.

.BR ncap (1), 
.BR ncap2 (1), 
.BR ncatted (1), 
.BR ncbo (1), 
.BR ncclimo (1), 
.BR nces (1), 
.BR ncecat (1), 
.BR ncflint (1), 
.BR ncks (1), 
.BR nco (1), 
.BR ncpdq (1), 
.BR ncra (1), 
.BR ncrcat (1), 
.BR ncremap (1), 
.BR ncrename (1), 
.BR ncwa (1) 

.SH HOMEPAGE
The 
.B NCO
homepage at <http://nco.sf.net> contains more information.
