.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: ROFF man page for ncflint
.\" Usage:
.\" nroff -man ~/nco/man/ncflint.1
.TH NCFLINT 1
.SH NAME
ncflint \- netCDF File Interpolator
.SH SYNTAX
ncflint [\-3] [\-4] [\-5] [\-6] [\-7] [\-A] [\-\-bfr
.IR sz_byt ] [\-C] [\-c] [\-\-cnk_byt
.IR sz_byt ] [\-\-cnk_csh
.IR sz_byt ] [\-\-cnk_dmn 
.IR nm,sz_lmn ]
[\-\-cnk_map 
.IR map ]
[\-\-cnk_min
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_plc 
.IR plc ]
[\-\-cnk_scl 
.IR sz_lmn ] [\-D 
.IR dbg_lvl ]
[\-d 
.IR dim ,[
.IR min ][,[
.IR max ]]]
[-F] [--fl_fmt=fmt] [\-\-fix_rec_crd] [\-G
.IR gpe_dsc ]
[\-g  
.IR grp [,...]]
[\-\-glb
.IR att_name=
.IR att_val ]]
[\-h] [\-\-hdf] [\-\-hdr_pad
.IR sz_byt ] [\-\-hpss_try]
[\-i
.IR var, val3 ] [\-L 
.IR dfl_lvl ] [\-l 
.IR path ]
[\-\-msa] [\-N] [\-\-no_cll_msr] [\-\-no_frm_trm] [\-\-no_tmp_fl] [\-O] [\-p 
.IR path ]
[\-\-ppc 
.IR var1 [,
.IR var2 [,...]]=
.IR prc ]]
[\-R] [\-r] [\-\-ram_all] [\-t
.IR thr_nbr ]
[\-\-uio] [\-\-unn] [\-v 
.IR var [,...]]
[\-w 
.IR wgt[,
.IR wgt2 ]]
[\-X 
.IR box ] 
[\-x] 
.I file1 file2 file3
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B ncflint
creates an output file that is a linear combination of the
input files.  This linear combination can be a weighted average, a
normalized weighted average, or an interpolation of the input files.
Coordinate variables are not acted upon in any case, they are simply
copied from
.I file_1.
 There are two conceptually distinct methods of using 
.B ncflint.
The first method is to specify the weight each input file is to have in the
output file.  In this method, the value 
.IR val3 
of a variable in the
output file 
.IR file_3 
is determined from its values 
.IR val1 
and 
.IR val2 
in the two input files according to
.IR wgt1*val1 + wgt2*val2

Here at least 
.IR wgt1,
and, optionally, 
.IR wgt2, 
are specified on the command line with the 
.BR \-w 
(or 
.BR \-\-weight
or 
.BR \-\-wgt_var
) switch.  If only 
.IR wgt1 
is specified then 
.IR wgt2 
is automatically computed as 
.IR wgt2 = 1 \- wgt1.  
Note that weights larger than 1 are allowed.  Thus it is
possible to specify 
.IR wgt1 = 2 
and 
.IR wgt2 = \-3.  
One can use this functionality to multiply all the values in a given file by a constant.
.PP
The second method of using 
.B ncflint
is to specify the interpolation option with 
.BR \-i
(or with the 
.BR \-\-ntp
or 
.BR \-\-interpolate
long options). This is really the inverse of the first method in the following sense.
When the user specifies the weights directly, 
.B ncflint
has no work to do besides multiplying the input values by their respective weights and
adding the results together to produce the output values.  This assumes
it is the weights that are known a priori.  In another class of cases
it is the "arrival value" (i.e., 
.IR val3
) of a particular variable 
.IR var
that is known a priori.  In this case, the implied weights can always
be inferred by examining the values of 
.IR var 
in the input files.  This
results in one equation in two unknowns, 
.IR wgt1 
and 
.IR wgt2:
.IR val3 = wgt1*val1 + wgt2*val2.
.PP
Unique determination of the weights requires imposing the
additional constraint of normalization on the weights: 
.IR wgt1 + wgt2 = 1.
Thus, to use the interpolation option, the user specifies 
.IR var 
and 
.IR val3
with the 
.BR \-i 
option.  
.B ncflint
will compute 
.IR wgt1 
and 
.IR wgt2, 
and use
these weights on all variables to generate the output file.  Although
.IR var 
may have any number of dimensions in the input files, it must
represent a single, scalar value.  Thus any dimensions associated with
.IR var 
must be "degenerate", i.e., of size one.
.PP
 If neither 
.BR \-i
nor
.BR \-w
is specified on the command line, 
.B ncflint
defaults to weighting each input file equally in the output file.  This
is equivalent to specifying 
.IR \-w 
0.5 or
.IR \-w 
0.5,0.5.  
Attempting to
specify both
.BR \-i 
and 
.BR \-w
methods in the same command is an error.
.PP
.B ncflint
is programmed not to interpolate variables of type
.BR NC_CHAR
and 
.BR NC_BYTE.  
This behavior is hardcoded.

.\" NB: Append man_end.txt here
.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: Trailer file for common ending to NCO man pages
.\" Usage: 
.\" Append this file to end of NCO man pages immediately after marker
.\" that says "Append man_end.txt here"
.SH AUTHOR
.B NCO
manual pages written by Charlie Zender and originally formatted by Brian Mays.

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <http://sf.net/bugs/?group_id=3331>.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1995-2018 Charlie Zender
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B NCO
is maintained as a Texinfo manual called the 
.B NCO Users Guide.
Because 
.B NCO
is mathematical in nature, the documentation includes TeX-intensive
portions not viewable on character-based displays. 
Hence the only complete and authoritative versions of the 
.B NCO Users Guide 
are the PDF (recommended), DVI, and Postscript versions at
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.pdf>, <http://nco.sf.net/nco.dvi>,
and <http://nco.sf.net/nco.ps>, respectively.
HTML and XML versions
are available at <http://nco.sf.net/nco.html> and
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.xml>, respectively.

If the
.B info
and
.B NCO
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info nco
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual, except for the
TeX-intensive portions.

.BR ncap (1), 
.BR ncap2 (1), 
.BR ncatted (1), 
.BR ncbo (1), 
.BR ncclimo (1), 
.BR nces (1), 
.BR ncecat (1), 
.BR ncflint (1), 
.BR ncks (1), 
.BR nco (1), 
.BR ncpdq (1), 
.BR ncra (1), 
.BR ncrcat (1), 
.BR ncremap (1), 
.BR ncrename (1), 
.BR ncwa (1) 

.SH HOMEPAGE
The 
.B NCO
homepage at <http://nco.sf.net> contains more information.
