.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: ROFF man page for ncks
.\" Usage:
.\" nroff -man ~/nco/man/ncks.1 | less
.TH NCKS 1
.SH NAME
ncks \- netCDF Kitchen Sink
.SH SYNTAX
ncks [\-3] [\-4] [\-5] [\-6] [\-7]
[\-A]
[\-a]
[\-\-area_wgt]
[\-b
.IR bnr_fl] 
[\-\-bfr
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-C]
[\-c] 
[\-\-cal]
[\-\-cdl]
[\-\-chk_map]
[\-\-chk_nan]
[\-\-cnk_byt
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_csh
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_dmn 
.IR nm,sz_lmn ]
[\-\-cnk_map 
.IR map ]
[\-\-cnk_min
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_plc 
.IR plc ]
[\-\-cnk_scl 
.IR sz_lmn ] 
[\-D
dbg_lvl]
[\-d 
.IR dim ,[
.IR min ][,[
.IR max ]][,[
.IR stride ]]]
[\-F]
[\-\-fl_fmt=fmt]
[\-\-fix_rec_dmn
.IR dim ]
[\-\-fmt_val
.IR fmt ]
[\-G
.IR gpe_dsc ]
[\-g  
.IR grp [,...]]
[\-\-glb
.IR att_name=
.IR att_val ]]
[\-\-grp_xtr_var_xcl]
[\-H]
[\-h]
[\-\-hdn] 
[\-\-hdr_pad
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-hpss_try]
[\-\-json]
[\-\-jsn_fmt
.IR lvl ] 
[\-l 
.IR path ]
[\-M]
[\-m]
[\-\-map
.IR map-file ]
[\-\-md5]
[\-\-mk_rec_dmn
.IR dim ]
[\-\-msa]
[\-\-no_blank]
[\-\-no_cll_msr]
[\-\-no_frm_trm]
[\-\-no_tmp_fl]
[\-O]
[\-o 
.IR output-file ] 
[\-P] [\-p 
.IR path ]
[\-\-ppc 
.IR var1 [,
.IR var2 [,...]]=
.IR prc ]]
[\-\-prn_fl
.IR print-file ]
[\-Q]
[\-q]
[\-R]
[\-r]
[\-\-rad]
[\-\-ram_all]
[\-\-rgr
.IR key=
.IR val ]
[\--rnr
.IR wgt ]
[\-s 
.IR format ]
[\-t
.IR thr_nbr ]
[\-u]
[\-\-uio]
[\-\-unn]
[\-V] [\-v 
.IR var [,...]]
[\-\-vrt_fl
.IR vrt_crd ]
[\-X 
.IR box ] 
[\-x]
[\-\-xml]
.I input-file
[
.IR output-file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B ncks
combines every feature we could think of, except the kitchen sink,
into one versatile utility to manipulate netCDF files. 
.B ncks
extracts a subset of the data from 
.I input-file
and
either prints it as ASCII text to stdout, or writes (or pastes) it to
.IR output-file ,
or both. 
.PP
.B ncks
will print netCDF data in ASCII format to 
.BR stdout ,
like 
.BR ncdump ,
but with these differences: 
.B ncks
prints data in a tabular format intended to be easy to
search for the data you want, one datum per screen line, with all
dimension subscripts and coordinate values (if any) preceding the datum.
Option 
.B \-s
allows the user the format the data using C-style
format strings.
.PP
Options 
.BR \-a ,
.BR \-F ,
.BR \-H ,
.BR \-M ,
.BR \-m ,
.BR \-Q ,
.BR \-q ,
.BR \-s ,
.BR \-u ,
and 
.B \-V
control the formatted appearance of 
the data.  
.PP
.B ncks
will extract (and optionally create a new netCDF file
comprised of) only selected variable from the input file, like
.B ncextr
but with these differences: Only variables and
coordinates may be specifically included or excluded---all global
attributes and any attribute associated with an extracted variable will
be copied to the screen and/or output netCDF file. 
Options 
.BR \-c ,
.BR \-C ,
.BR \-v ,
and 
.BR \-x
control which
variables are extracted.
.PP
.B ncks
will extract hyperslabs from the specified variables.
In fact 
.B ncks
implements the nccut specification exactly.
Option 
.B \-d
controls the hyperslab specification.
.PP
Input dimensions that are not associated with any output variable will
not appear in the output netCDF.
This feature removes superfluous dimensions from a netCDF file. 
.PP
.B ncks
will append variables and attributes from the
.I input-file
to 
.I output-file
if 
.I output-file
is a
pre-existing netCDF file whose relevant dimensions conform to dimension
sizes of 
.IR input-file .
The append features of 
.B ncks
are intended to provide a rudimentary
means of adding data from one netCDF file to another, conforming, netCDF
file. 
When naming conflicts exists between the two files, data in
.I output-file
is usually overwritten by the corresponding data from
.IR input-file .
Thus it is recommended that the user backup 
.I output-file
in case
valuable data is accidentally overwritten.
.PP
If 
.I output-file
exists, the user will be queried whether to
.IR overwrite ,
.IR append ,
or 
.I exit
the 
.B ncks
call
completely.  
Choosing 
.I overwrite
destroys the existing 
.I output-file
and
create an entirely new one from the output of the 
.B ncks
call.  
Append has differing effects depending on the uniqueness of the
variables and attributes output by 
.BR ncks :
If a variable or
attribute extracted from 
.I input-file
does not have a name conflict with
the members of 
.I output-file
then it will be added to 
.I "output-file"
without overwriting any of the existing contents of 
.IR output-file .
In this case the relevant dimensions must agree (conform) between the
two files; new dimensions are created in 
.I output-file
as required. 
When a name conflict occurs, a global attribute from 
.I "input-file"
will overwrite the corresponding global attribute from
.IR output-file .
If the name conflict occurs for a non-record variable, then the
dimensions and type of the variable (and of its coordinate dimensions,
if any) must agree (conform) in both files. 
Then the variable values (and any coordinate dimension values)
from 
.I input-file
will overwrite the corresponding variable values (and
coordinate dimension values, if any) in 
.I output-file
.PP
Since there can only be one record dimension in a file, the record
dimension must have the same name (but not necessarily the same size) in
both files if a record dimension variable is to be appended. 
If the record dimensions are of differing sizes, the record dimension of
.I output-file
will become the greater of the two record dimension sizes,
the record variable from 
.I input-file
will overwrite any counterpart in
.I output-file
and fill values will be written to any gaps left in the
rest of the record variables (I think). 
In all cases variable attributes in 
.I output-file
are superseded by
attributes of the same name from 
.IR input-file ,
and left alone if
there is no name conflict. 
.PP
Some users may wish to avoid interactive 
.B ncks
queries about
whether to overwrite existing data.
For example, batch scripts will fail if 
.B ncks
does not receive
responses to its queries. 
Options 
.B \-O
and 
.B \-A
are available to force overwriting
existing files and variables, respectively. 
.PP
Options specific to 
.B ncks
.PP
The following list provides a short summary of the features unique to
.BR ncks .
.PP
.PP
.TP
.B \-a 
Do not alphabetize extracted fields. 
By default, the specified output variables are extracted, printed, and
written to disk in alphabetical order.
This tends to make long output lists easier to search for particular
variables. 
Specifying 
.B \-a
results in the variables being extracted, printed,
and written to disk in the order in which they were saved in the input
file.
Thus 
.B \-a
retains the original ordering of the variables.
.PP
.TP
.B \-d 
.IR dim ,[
.IR min ][,[
.IR max ]][,[
.IR stride ]]
Add 
.I stride
argument to hyperslabber. 
.PP
.TP
.B \-H 
Print data to screen.
The default behavior is to print data to screen if no netCDF output
file is specified. 
Use 
.B \-H 
to print data to screen if a netCDF output is specified
(the same behavior applies to 
.B \-m
).
Unless otherwise specified (with 
.BR \-s ),
each element of the data
hyperslab is printed on a separate line containing the names, indices,
and, values, if any, of all of the variables dimensions.
The dimension and variable indices refer to the location of the
corresponding data element with respect to the variable as stored on
disk (i.e., not the hyperslab).
.RS
% ncks \-H \-C \-v three_dmn_var in.nc
.br
lat[0]=\-90 lev[0]=100 lon[0]=0 three_dmn_var[0]=0 
.br
lat[0]=\-90 lev[0]=100 lon[1]=90 three_dmn_var[1]=1 
.br
lat[0]=\-90 lev[0]=100 lon[2]=180 three_dmn_var[2]=2 
.br
\ .\|.\|.\ 
.br
lat[1]=90 lev[2]=1000 lon[1]=90 three_dmn_var[21]=21 
.br
lat[1]=90 lev[2]=1000 lon[2]=180 three_dmn_var[22]=22 
.br
lat[1]=90 lev[2]=1000 lon[3]=270 three_dmn_var[23]=23 
.RE
Printing the same variable with the 
.B \-F
option shows the same
variable indexed with Fortran conventions
.RS
% ncks \-F \-H \-C \-v three_dmn_var in.nc
.br
lon(1)=0 lev(1)=100 lat(1)=\-90 three_dmn_var(1)=0 
.br
lon(2)=90 lev(1)=100 lat(1)=\-90 three_dmn_var(2)=1 
.br
lon(3)=180 lev(1)=100 lat(1)=\-90 three_dmn_var(3)=2 
.br
\ .\|.\|.\ 
.RE
Printing a hyperslab does not affect the variable or dimension indices
since these indices are relative to the full variable (as stored in the
input file), and the input file has not changed.
However, if the hyperslab is saved to an output file and those values
are printed, the indices will change:
.RS
% ncks \-H \-d lat,90.0 \-d lev,1000.0 \-v three_dmn_var in.nc out.nc
.br
lat[1]=90 lev[2]=1000 lon[0]=0 three_dmn_var[20]=20 
.br
lat[1]=90 lev[2]=1000 lon[1]=90 three_dmn_var[21]=21 
.br
lat[1]=90 lev[2]=1000 lon[2]=180 three_dmn_var[22]=22 
.br
lat[1]=90 lev[2]=1000 lon[3]=270 three_dmn_var[23]=23 
.br
% ncks \-H out.nc
.br
lat[0]=90 lev[0]=1000 lon[0]=0 three_dmn_var[0]=20 
.br
lat[0]=90 lev[0]=1000 lon[1]=90 three_dmn_var[1]=21 
.br
lat[0]=90 lev[0]=1000 lon[2]=180 three_dmn_var[2]=22 
.br
lat[0]=90 lev[0]=1000 lon[3]=270 three_dmn_var[3]=23 
.RE
.PP
.TP
.B \-M
Print to screen the global metadata describing the file.
This includes file summary information and global attributes. 
.PP
.TP
.B \-m
Print variable metadata to screen (similar to 
.BR "ncdump \-h" ).
This displays all metadata pertaining to each variable, one variable
at a time.
.PP
.TP
.B \-Q 
Toggle printing of dimension indices and coordinate values when printing
arrays. 
The name of each variable will appear flush left in the output.
This is useful when trying to locate specific variables when displaying
many variables with different dimensions.
The mnemonic for this option is "quiet".
.PP
.TP
.B \-s 
.I "format"
String format for text output. Accepts C language escape sequences and
.B printf()
formats. 
.PP
.TP
.B \-u 
Accompany the printing of a variable's values with its units attribute,
if it exists.  
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
View all data in netCDF 
.BR in.nc ,
printed with Fortran indexing
conventions: 
.RS
ncks \-H \-F in.nc
.RE
.PP
Copy the netCDF file 
.B in.nc
to file 
.BR out.nc .
.RS
ncks \-O in.nc out.nc
.RE
Now the file 
.B out.nc
contains all the data from 
.BR in.nc .
There are, however, two differences between 
.B in.nc
and
.BR out.nc .
First, the 
.B history
global attribute
will contain the command used to create 
.BR out.nc .
Second, the variables in 
.B out.nc
will be defined in alphabetical
order.
Of course the internal storage of variable in a netCDF file should be
transparent to the user, but there are cases when alphabetizing a file 
is useful (see description of 
.B \-a
switch).
.PP
Print variable 
.B three_dmn_var
from file 
.B in.nc
with
default notations. 
Next print 
.B three_dmn_var
as an un-annotated text column.
Then print 
.B three_dmn_var
signed with very high precision.
Finally, print 
.B three_dmn_var
as a comma-separated list.
.RS
% ncks \-H \-C \-v three_dmn_var in.nc
.br
lat[0]=\-90 lev[0]=100 lon[0]=0 three_dmn_var[0]=0 
.br
lat[0]=\-90 lev[0]=100 lon[1]=90 three_dmn_var[1]=1 
.br
\ .\|.\|.\ 
.br
lat[1]=90 lev[2]=1000 lon[3]=270 three_dmn_var[23]=23 
.br
% ncks \-s "%f\\n" \-H \-C \-v three_dmn_var in.nc
.br
0.000000
.br
1.000000
.br
\ .\|.\|.\ 
.br
23.000000
.br
% ncks \-s "%+16.10f\\n" \-H \-C \-v three_dmn_var in.nc
.br
   +0.0000000000
.br
   +1.0000000000
.br
\ .\|.\|.\ 
.br
  +23.0000000000
.br
% ncks \-s "%f, " \-H \-C \-v three_dmn_var in.nc
.br
0.000000, 1.000000, \ .\|.\|.\ , 23.000000,
.RE
The second and third options are useful when pasting data into text
files like reports or papers.  
.PP
One dimensional arrays of characters stored as netCDF variables are 
automatically printed as strings, whether or not they are
NUL-terminated, e.g.,
.RS
ncks \-v fl_nm in.nc
.RE
The 
.B %c
formatting code is useful for printing 
multidimensional arrays of characters representing fixed length strings
.RS
ncks \-H \-s "%c" \-v fl_nm_arr in.nc
.RE
Using the 
.B %s
format code on strings which are not NUL-terminated 
(and thus not technically strings) is likely to result in a core dump.
.PP
Create netCDF 
.B out.nc
containing all variables, and any associated
coordinates, except variable 
.BR time ,
from netCDF 
.BR in.nc :
.RS
ncks \-x \-v time in.nc out.nc
.RE
.PP
Extract variables 
.B time
and 
.B pressure
from netCDF 
.BR in.nc .
If 
.B out.nc
does not exist it will be created.
Otherwise the you will be prompted whether to append to or to
overwrite 
.BR out.nc :
.RS
ncks \-v time,pressure in.nc out.nc
.br
ncks \-C \-v time,pressure in.nc out.nc
.RE
The first version of the command creates an 
.B out.nc
which contains
.BR time ,
.BR pressure ,
and any coordinate variables associated
with 
.IR pressure .
The 
.B out.nc
from the second version is guaranteed to contain only
two variables 
.B time
and 
.BR pressure .
.PP
Create netCDF 
.B out.nc
containing all variables from file 
.BR in.nc .
Restrict the dimensions of these variables to a hyperslab. 
Print (with 
.BR \-H )
the hyperslabs to the screen for good measure.  
The specified hyperslab is: the sixth value in dimension 
.BR time ;
the
half-open range 
.I lat
<= 0.0 in coordinate 
.BR lat ;
the
half-open range
.I lon
>= 330.0 in coordinate 
.BR lon ;
the
closed interval 0.3 <=
.I band
<= 0.5 in coordinate 
.BR band ;
and
cross-section closest to 1000.0 in coordinate 
.BR lev .
Note that limits applied to coordinate values are specified with a
decimal point, and limits applied to dimension indices do not have a
decimal point.
.RS
ncks \-H \-d time,5 \-d lat,,0. \-d lon,330., \-d band,.3,.5 \-d lev,1000. in.nc out.nc 
.RE
.PP
Assume the domain of the monotonically increasing longitude coordinate
.B lon
is 0 < 
.I lon
< 360. 
Here, 
.B lon
is an example of a wrapped coordinate.
.B ncks
will extract a hyperslab which crosses the Greenwich
meridian simply by specifying the westernmost longitude as 
.I min
and
the easternmost longitude as 
.IR max ,
as follows:
.RS
ncks \-d lon,260.,45. in.nc out.nc
.RE

.\" NB: Append man_end.txt here
.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: Trailer file for common ending to NCO man pages
.\" Usage: 
.\" Append this file to end of NCO man pages immediately after marker
.\" that says "Append man_end.txt here"
.SH AUTHOR
.B NCO
manual pages written by Charlie Zender and originally formatted by Brian Mays.

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <http://sf.net/bugs/?group_id=3331>.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1995-2018 Charlie Zender
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B NCO
is maintained as a Texinfo manual called the 
.B NCO Users Guide.
Because 
.B NCO
is mathematical in nature, the documentation includes TeX-intensive
portions not viewable on character-based displays. 
Hence the only complete and authoritative versions of the 
.B NCO Users Guide 
are the PDF (recommended), DVI, and Postscript versions at
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.pdf>, <http://nco.sf.net/nco.dvi>,
and <http://nco.sf.net/nco.ps>, respectively.
HTML and XML versions
are available at <http://nco.sf.net/nco.html> and
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.xml>, respectively.

If the
.B info
and
.B NCO
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info nco
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual, except for the
TeX-intensive portions.

.BR ncap (1), 
.BR ncap2 (1), 
.BR ncatted (1), 
.BR ncbo (1), 
.BR ncclimo (1), 
.BR nces (1), 
.BR ncecat (1), 
.BR ncflint (1), 
.BR ncks (1), 
.BR nco (1), 
.BR ncpdq (1), 
.BR ncra (1), 
.BR ncrcat (1), 
.BR ncremap (1), 
.BR ncrename (1), 
.BR ncwa (1) 

.SH HOMEPAGE
The 
.B NCO
homepage at <http://nco.sf.net> contains more information.
