.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: ROFF man page for nco
.\" Usage:
.\" nroff -man ~/nco/man/nco.1
.TH NCO 1
.SH NAME
NCO \- netCDF Operators
.SH SYNTAX
operator 
[
.IR options ]
.I input-files
.I output-file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The netCDF Operators, or 
.B NCO
are a suite of programs known as 
.IR operators .
Each operator is a standalone, command line program which is executed at
the UNIX shell-level like, e.g., 
.B ls
or
.BR mkdir .
The operators take netCDF (<http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/packages/netcdf>)
files as input, then perform a set of operations (e.g., deriving new
data, averaging, hyperslabbing, or metadata manipulation) and produce a 
netCDF file as output. 
The operators are primarily designed to aid manipulation and analysis of
gridded scientific data.
The single command style of 
.B NCO 
allows users to manipulate and analyze
files interactively and with simple scripts, avoiding the overhead
(and some of the power) of a higher level programming environment. 
The 
.B NCO Users Guide
illustrates their use
with examples from the field of climate modeling and analysis.
.PP
The available 
.I operators 
are:
.PP 
.RS
.BR ncap2 ,
netCDF Arithmetic Processor
.RE
.RS
.BR ncatted ,
netCDF Attribute Editor
.RE
.RS
.BR ncbo , 
netCDF Binary Operator (includes 
.BR ncadd , 
.BR ncsubtract , 
.BR ncmultiply , 
.BR ncdivide )
.RE
.RS
.BR nces , 
netCDF Ensemble Averager
.RE
.RS
.BR ncecat , 
netCDF Ensemble Concatenator
.RE
.RS
.BR ncflint , 
netCDF File Interpolator
.RE
.RS
.BR ncks , 
netCDF Kitchen Sink
.RE
.RS
.BR ncpdq ,
netCDF Permute Dimensions Quickly, Pack Data Quietly
.RE
.RS
.BR ncra , 
netCDF Record Averager
.RE
.RS
.BR ncrcat ,
netCDF Record Concatenator
.RE
.RS
.BR ncrename , 
netCDF Renamer
.RE
.RS
.BR ncwa ,
netCDF Weighted Averager.
.RE
(Note that the "averagers"
are misnamed because they perform many non-linear operations as well,
e.g., total, minimum, maximum, RMS).
.PP
The operators are as general as netCDF
itself: there are no restrictions on the contents of the netCDF
file(s) used as input.
.BR NCO 's 
internal routines are completely dynamic and impose no limit on
the number or sizes of dimensions, variables, and files.
.B NCO 
is designed to be used both interactively and with large batch jobs.
The default operator behavior is often sufficient for everyday needs, 
and there are numerous command line (i.e., run-time) options, for
special cases.
.B NCO
works well on all modern operating systems.

.\" NB: Append man_end.txt here
.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: Trailer file for common ending to NCO man pages
.\" Usage: 
.\" Append this file to end of NCO man pages immediately after marker
.\" that says "Append man_end.txt here"
.SH AUTHOR
.B NCO
manual pages written by Charlie Zender and originally formatted by Brian Mays.

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <http://sf.net/bugs/?group_id=3331>.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1995-2018 Charlie Zender
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B NCO
is maintained as a Texinfo manual called the 
.B NCO Users Guide.
Because 
.B NCO
is mathematical in nature, the documentation includes TeX-intensive
portions not viewable on character-based displays. 
Hence the only complete and authoritative versions of the 
.B NCO Users Guide 
are the PDF (recommended), DVI, and Postscript versions at
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.pdf>, <http://nco.sf.net/nco.dvi>,
and <http://nco.sf.net/nco.ps>, respectively.
HTML and XML versions
are available at <http://nco.sf.net/nco.html> and
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.xml>, respectively.

If the
.B info
and
.B NCO
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info nco
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual, except for the
TeX-intensive portions.

.BR ncap2 (1), 
.BR ncatted (1), 
.BR ncbo (1), 
.BR ncclimo (1), 
.BR nces (1), 
.BR ncecat (1), 
.BR ncflint (1), 
.BR ncks (1), 
.BR nco (1), 
.BR ncpdq (1), 
.BR ncra (1), 
.BR ncrcat (1), 
.BR ncremap (1), 
.BR ncrename (1), 
.BR ncwa (1) 

.SH HOMEPAGE
The 
.B NCO
homepage at <http://nco.sf.net> contains more information.
