.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: ROFF man page for ncra
.\" Usage:
.\" nroff -man ~/nco/man/ncra.1 | less
.TH NCRA 1
.SH NAME
ncra \- netCDF Record Averager
.SH SYNTAX
ncra [\-3] [\-4] [\-5] [\-6] [\-7]
[\-A]
[\-\-bfr
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-C]
[\-c]
[\-\-cb
.IR y1,y2,m1,m2,tpd ]
[\-\-cnk_byt
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_csh
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_dmn
.IR nm,sz_lmn ]
[\-\-cnk_map 
.IR map ]
[\-\-cnk_min
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_plc 
.IR plc ]
[\-\-cnk_scl 
.IR sz_lmn ]
[\-D 
.IR dbg_lvl ]
[\-d 
.IR dim ,[
.IR min ][,[
.IR max ]][,
.IR stride [[,[
.IR subcycle [[,[
.IR interleave ]]]]]]
[\-\-dbl|flt]
[-F]
[--fl_fmt=fmt]
[\-G
.IR gpe_dsc ]
[\-g  
.IR grp [,...]]
[\-\-glb
.IR att_name=
.IR att_val ]]
[\-h]
[\-\-hdf]
[\-\-hdr_pad
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-hpss_try]
[\-L 
.IR dfl_lvl ] 
[\-l 
.IR path ]
[\-\-mro]
[\-\-msa]
[\-N]
[\-n 
.IR loop ]
[\-\-no_cll_msr]
[\-\-no_cll_mth]
[\-\-no_frm_trm]
[\-\-no_tmp_fl]
[\-O]
[\-p 
.IR path ]
[\-\-ppc 
.IR var1 [,
.IR var2 [,...]]=
.IR prc ]]
[\-\-prm_int]
[\-\-prw
.IR wgt_arr ]
[\-R]
[\-r]
[\-\-ram_all]
[\-\-rec_apn]
[\-t
.IR thr_nbr ]
[\-\-uio]
[\-\-unn]
[\-v 
.IR var [,...]]
[\-w 
.IR wgt ]
[\-X 
.IR box ] 
[\-x]
[\-y 
.IR op_typ ]
.I input-files
.I output-file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B ncra
averages record variables across an arbitrary number of
input files.
The record dimension is retained as a degenerate (size 1) dimension in
the output variables.
.PP
Input files may vary in size, but each must have a record dimension.
The record coordinate, if any, should be monotonic for (or else non-fatal
warnings may be generated).
Hyperslabs of the record dimension which include more than one file are
handled correctly.
.B ncra
supports the 
.I stride
argument to the 
.B \-d
hyperslab option for the record dimension only, 
.I stride
is not
supported for non-record dimensions.
.PP
.B ncra
weights each record (e.g., time slice) in the
.I input-files
equally.
.B ncra
does not attempt to see if, say, the 
.B time
coordinate
is irregularly spaced and thus would require a weighted average in order
to be a true time average.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Average files 
.BR 85.nc ,
.BR 86.nc ,
\ .\|.\|.\ 
.B 89.nc
along the record dimension, and store the results in 
.BR 8589.nc :
.RS
ncra 85.nc 86.nc 87.nc 88.nc 89.nc 8589.nc
.br
ncra 8[56789].nc 8589.nc
.br
ncra \-n 5,2,1 85.nc 8589.nc
.RE
These three methods produce identical answers.
.PP
Assume the files 
.BR 85.nc ,
.BR 86.nc ,
\ .\|.\|.\ 
.B 89.nc
each
contain a record coordinate 
.I time
of length 12 defined such that
the third record in 
.B 86.nc
contains data from March 1986, etc.
NCO knows how to hyperslab the record dimension across files.
Thus, to average data from December, 1985 through February, 1986:
.RS
ncra \-d time,11,13 85.nc 86.nc 87.nc 8512_8602.nc
.br
ncra \-F \-d time,12,14 85.nc 86.nc 87.nc 8512_8602.nc
.RE
The file 
.B 87.nc
is superfluous, but does not cause an error.
The 
.B \-F
turns on the Fortran (1-based) indexing convention.
The following uses the 
.I stride
option to average all the March
temperature data from multiple input files into a single output file
.RS
ncra \-F \-d time,3,,12 \-v temperature 85.nc 86.nc 87.nc 858687_03.nc
.RE
.PP
Assume the 
.I time
coordinate is incrementally numbered such that
January, 1985 = 1 and December, 1989 = 60.
Assuming 
.B ??
only expands to the five desired files, the following
averages June, 1985--June, 1989: 
.RS
ncra \-d time,6.,54. ??.nc 8506_8906.nc
.RE

.\" NB: Append man_end.txt here
.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: Trailer file for common ending to NCO man pages
.\" Usage: 
.\" Append this file to end of NCO man pages immediately after marker
.\" that says "Append man_end.txt here"
.SH AUTHOR
.B NCO
manual pages written by Charlie Zender and originally formatted by Brian Mays.

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <http://sf.net/bugs/?group_id=3331>.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1995-2018 Charlie Zender
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B NCO
is maintained as a Texinfo manual called the 
.B NCO Users Guide.
Because 
.B NCO
is mathematical in nature, the documentation includes TeX-intensive
portions not viewable on character-based displays. 
Hence the only complete and authoritative versions of the 
.B NCO Users Guide 
are the PDF (recommended), DVI, and Postscript versions at
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.pdf>, <http://nco.sf.net/nco.dvi>,
and <http://nco.sf.net/nco.ps>, respectively.
HTML and XML versions
are available at <http://nco.sf.net/nco.html> and
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.xml>, respectively.

If the
.B info
and
.B NCO
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info nco
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual, except for the
TeX-intensive portions.

.BR ncap (1), 
.BR ncap2 (1), 
.BR ncatted (1), 
.BR ncbo (1), 
.BR ncclimo (1), 
.BR nces (1), 
.BR ncecat (1), 
.BR ncflint (1), 
.BR ncks (1), 
.BR nco (1), 
.BR ncpdq (1), 
.BR ncra (1), 
.BR ncrcat (1), 
.BR ncremap (1), 
.BR ncrename (1), 
.BR ncwa (1) 

.SH HOMEPAGE
The 
.B NCO
homepage at <http://nco.sf.net> contains more information.
