.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: ROFF man page for ncrcat
.\" Usage:
.\" nroff -man ~/nco/man/ncrcat.1 | less
.TH NCRCAT 1
.SH NAME
ncrcat \- netCDF Record Concatenator
.SH SYNTAX
ncrcat [\-3] [\-4] [\-5] [\-6] [\-7]
[\-A]
[\-\-bfr
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-C]
[\-c]
[\-\-cb
.IR y1,y2,m1,m2,tpd ]
[\-\-cnk_byt
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_csh
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_dmn 
.IR nm,sz_lmn ]
[\-\-cnk_map 
.IR map ]
[\-\-cnk_min
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-\-cnk_plc 
.IR plc ]
[\-\-cnk_scl 
.IR sz_lmn ] [\-D
.IR dbg_lvl ]
[\-d 
.IR dim ,[
.IR min ][,[
.IR max ]][,[
.IR stride [[,[
.IR subcycle [[,[
.IR interleave ]]]]]]
[-F] [--fl_fmt=fmt] [\-G
.IR gpe_dsc ]
[\-g  
.IR grp [,...]]
[\-\-glb
.IR att_name=
.IR att_val ]]
[\-h] [\-\-hdr_pad
.IR sz_byt ]
[\-L 
.IR dfl_lvl ] 
[\-l 
.IR path ]
[\-\-mro] [\-\-msa] [\-n
.IR loop]
[\-\-no_cll_msr] [\-\-no_frm_trm] [\-\-no_tmp_fl] [\-O] [\-p
.IR path ]
[\-\-ppc 
.IR var1 [,
.IR var2 [,...]]=
.IR prc ]]
[\-R] [\-r] [\-\-ram_all] [\-\-rec_apn] [\-t
.IR thr_nbr ]
[\-\-uio] [\-\-unn] [\-v 
.IR var [,...]]
[\-X 
.IR box ] 
[\-x] 
.I input-files
.I output-file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B ncrcat
concatenates record variables across an arbitrary number
of input files.
The final record dimension is by default the sum of the lengths of the
record dimensions in the input files.
.PP
Input files may vary in size, but each must have a record dimension.
The record coordinate, if any, should be monotonic (or else non-fatal
warnings may be generated).
Hyperslabs of the record dimension which include more than one file are
handled correctly.
.B ncra
supports the 
.I stride
argument to the 
.B \-d
hyperslab option for the record dimension only, 
.I stride
is not
supported for non-record dimensions.
.PP
.B ncrcat
applies special rules to ARM convention time fields (e.g.,
.BR time_offset ).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Concatenate files 
.BR 85.nc ,
.BR 86.nc ,
\ .\|.\|.\ 
.B 89.nc
along the record dimension, and store the results in 
.BR 8589.nc :
.RS
ncrcat 85.nc 86.nc 87.nc 88.nc 89.nc 8589.nc
.br
ncrcat 8[56789].nc 8589.nc
.br
ncrcat \-n 5,2,1 85.nc 8589.nc
.RE
These three methods produce identical answers.
.PP
Assume the files 
.BR 85.nc ,
.BR 86.nc ,
\ .\|.\|.\ 
.B 89.nc
each
contain a record coordinate 
.I time
of length 12 defined such that
the third record in 
.B 86.nc
contains data from March 1986, etc.
NCO knows how to hyperslab the record dimension across files.
Thus, to concatenate data from December, 1985--February, 1986:
.RS
ncrcat \-d time,11,13 85.nc 86.nc 87.nc 8512_8602.nc
.br
ncrcat \-F \-d time,12,14 85.nc 86.nc 87.nc 8512_8602.nc
.RE
The file 
.B 87.nc
is superfluous, but does not cause an error.
The 
.B \-F
turns on the Fortran (1-based) indexing convention.
.PP
The following uses the 
.I stride
option to concatenate all the March
temperature data from multiple input files into a single output file
.RS
ncrcat \-F \-d time,3,,12 \-v temperature 85.nc 86.nc 87.nc 858687_03.nc
.RE
.PP
Assume the 
.I time
coordinate is incrementally numbered such that
January, 1985 = 1 and December, 1989 = 60.
Assuming 
.B ??
only expands to the five desired files, the following
concatenates June, 1985--June, 1989: 
.RS
ncrcat \-d time,6.,54. ??.nc 8506_8906.nc
.RE

.SH CAVEAT

.B ncrcat
does not re-scale packed data (i.e., data stored using the
.B scale_factor
and
.B add_offset 
attributes recommended by the Unidat and CF conventions.
.B ncrcat
just copies the data directly from the input files.
It copies the relevant metadata (i.e., 
.B scale_factor 
and 
.B add_offset
attributes) from the first file. 
Concatenating multiple datasets packed with different scales is beyond
its capabilities (concatenating data packed with the same scales in
multiple files works fine). 
The workaround for cases where the scales change among files is to
first unpack the data in all the file using 
.B ncpdq,
then to concatenate the unpacked data using
.B ncrcat,
and finally to repack the result using
.B ncpdq.

.\" NB: Append man_end.txt here
.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: Trailer file for common ending to NCO man pages
.\" Usage: 
.\" Append this file to end of NCO man pages immediately after marker
.\" that says "Append man_end.txt here"
.SH AUTHOR
.B NCO
manual pages written by Charlie Zender and originally formatted by Brian Mays.

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <http://sf.net/bugs/?group_id=3331>.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1995-2018 Charlie Zender
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B NCO
is maintained as a Texinfo manual called the 
.B NCO Users Guide.
Because 
.B NCO
is mathematical in nature, the documentation includes TeX-intensive
portions not viewable on character-based displays. 
Hence the only complete and authoritative versions of the 
.B NCO Users Guide 
are the PDF (recommended), DVI, and Postscript versions at
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.pdf>, <http://nco.sf.net/nco.dvi>,
and <http://nco.sf.net/nco.ps>, respectively.
HTML and XML versions
are available at <http://nco.sf.net/nco.html> and
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.xml>, respectively.

If the
.B info
and
.B NCO
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info nco
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual, except for the
TeX-intensive portions.

.BR ncap (1), 
.BR ncap2 (1), 
.BR ncatted (1), 
.BR ncbo (1), 
.BR ncclimo (1), 
.BR nces (1), 
.BR ncecat (1), 
.BR ncflint (1), 
.BR ncks (1), 
.BR nco (1), 
.BR ncpdq (1), 
.BR ncra (1), 
.BR ncrcat (1), 
.BR ncremap (1), 
.BR ncrename (1), 
.BR ncwa (1) 

.SH HOMEPAGE
The 
.B NCO
homepage at <http://nco.sf.net> contains more information.
