.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: ROFF man page for ncremap
.\" Usage:
.\" nroff -man ~/nco/man/ncremap.1 | less
.TH NCREMAP 1
.SH NAME
ncremap \- netCDF Remapper
.SH SYNTAX
ncremap
[\-3]
[\-4]
[\-5]
[\-6]
[\-7]
[\-a
.IR alg_typ ]
[\--a2o ]
[\-D
.IR dbg_lvl ] 
[\-d
.IR dst_fl ]
[\--devnull=
.IR dvn_flg ]
[\--dt_sng=
.IR dt_sng ]
[\--fl_fmt=
.IR fmt]
[\--d2f ]
[\--dpt ]
[\--dpt_fl
.IR dpt_fl ]
[\--esmf_typ=
.IR esmf_typ ]
[\-G
.IR grd_sng ] 
[\-g
.IR grd_fl ] 
[\-I
.IR in_drc ] 
[\-i
.IR in_fl ] 
[\-j
.IR job_nbr ] 
[\-L
.IR dfl_lvl ] 
[\-M] [\-m
.IR map_fl ]
[\--msk_dst=
.IR msk_dst ]
[\--msk_out=
.IR msk_out ]
[\--msk_src=
.IR msk_src ]
[\--mss_val=
.IR mss_val ]
[\-n
.IR nco_usr ]
[\--nm_dst=
.IR nm_dst ]
[\--nm_src=
.IR nm_src ] 
[\--no_cll_msr ]
[\--no_frm_trm]
[\-O
.IR out_drc ] 
[\-o
.IR output-file ] 
[\-P
.IR prc_typ ] 
[\-p
.IR par_typ ]
[\--pdq_opt=
.IR pdq_opt ] 
[\--ppc_opt=
.IR ppc_opt ] 
[\--preserve=
.IR prs_stt ]
[\-R
.IR rgr_opt ]
[\--rrg_bb_wesn=
.IR bb_wesn ]
[\--rrg_dat_glb=
.IR dat_glb ]
[\--rrg_grd_glb=
.IR grd_glb ]
[\--rrg_grd_rgn=
.IR grd_rgn ]
[\--rrg_rnm_sng=
.IR rnm_sng ]
[\-s
.IR grd_src ]
[\--sgs_frc=
.IR sgs_frc ]
[\--sgs_msk=
.IR sgs_msk ]
[\--sgs_nrm=
.IR sgs_nrm ]
[\--skl_fl =
.IR skl_fl]
[\--stdin ]
[\--no_stdin ]
[\--stg_grd]
[\--no_stg_grd]
[\-T
.IR drc_tmp ] 
[\-t
.IR thr_nbr ] 
[\-U] [\-u
.IR unq_sfx ]
[\--ugrid_fl=
.IR ugrid_fl]
[\-\-uio] 
[\-V
.IR rgr_var ] 
[\-v
.IR var_lst ] 
[\--vrb_lvl= 
.IR vrb_lvl ]
[\--version ]
[\--vrt_fl
.IR vrt_fl ]
[\--vrt_ntp=
.IR vrt_ntp ]
[\--vrt_xtr=
.IR vrt_xtr ]
[\-W
.IR wgt_opt ]
[\-w
.IR wgt_cmd ] 
[\-x
.IR xtn_lst ]
[\--xcl_var ]
[\--xtr_nsp=
.IR xtr_nsp ]
[\--xtr_xpn=
.IR xtr_xpn ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B ncremap
remaps the data in the
.I input-file
file(s) to the grid specified by (in descending order of precedence)
.I map_fl ,
.I dst_fl, 
.I grd_dst, or
.I grd_sng,
and stores the result(s) in the
.I output-file
file(s).

.\" NB: Append man_end.txt here
.\" $Header$ -*-nroff-*-
.\" Purpose: Trailer file for common ending to NCO man pages
.\" Usage: 
.\" Append this file to end of NCO man pages immediately after marker
.\" that says "Append man_end.txt here"
.SH AUTHOR
.B NCO
manual pages written by Charlie Zender and originally formatted by Brian Mays.

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <http://sf.net/bugs/?group_id=3331>.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1995-2018 Charlie Zender
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B NCO
is maintained as a Texinfo manual called the 
.B NCO Users Guide.
Because 
.B NCO
is mathematical in nature, the documentation includes TeX-intensive
portions not viewable on character-based displays. 
Hence the only complete and authoritative versions of the 
.B NCO Users Guide 
are the PDF (recommended), DVI, and Postscript versions at
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.pdf>, <http://nco.sf.net/nco.dvi>,
and <http://nco.sf.net/nco.ps>, respectively.
HTML and XML versions
are available at <http://nco.sf.net/nco.html> and
<http://nco.sf.net/nco.xml>, respectively.

If the
.B info
and
.B NCO
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info nco
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual, except for the
TeX-intensive portions.

.BR ncap (1), 
.BR ncap2 (1), 
.BR ncatted (1), 
.BR ncbo (1), 
.BR ncclimo (1), 
.BR nces (1), 
.BR ncecat (1), 
.BR ncflint (1), 
.BR ncks (1), 
.BR nco (1), 
.BR ncpdq (1), 
.BR ncra (1), 
.BR ncrcat (1), 
.BR ncremap (1), 
.BR ncrename (1), 
.BR ncwa (1) 

.SH HOMEPAGE
The 
.B NCO
homepage at <http://nco.sf.net> contains more information.
